article: update cycle (#22)
MOD-Magazine/MOD-Magazine: April23/update-cycle.md

---
title: The Effect of Mojang's New Update Cycle on Modders
author: Zxhir
---

# Introduction

> Modding has been an integral part of the Minecraft community since its inception. One of the reasons for its success is the ability for players to create their own modifications, or "mods," that change the game in various ways. These mods can range from simple cosmetic changes to complete overhauls of the game's mechanics. They are often created by independent developers who work tirelessly to improve the game for others. However, the recent update cycle by Mojang has had a significant impact on modders, and many are struggling to keep up with the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modding has been an integral part of the Minecraft community since its inception. One of the reasons for its success is the ability for players to create their own modifications, or "mods," that change the game in various ways. These mods can range from simple cosmetic changes to complete overhauls of the game's mechanics. They are often created by independent developers who work tirelessly to improve the game for others. However, the new update cycle recently introduced by Mojang has had a significant impact on modders, and many are struggling to keep up with the changes.
```

I would qualify this since it's the first mention of the update cycle

## Mojang's Update Cycle

The new update cycle pushes out small updates more frequently for versions like 1.19.3. This is helpful for vanilla players and probably for the dev team, but it has a significant impact on modders. The modding community or players often rely on mods that are outdated and no longer work with the latest version of the game. This means that modders have to constantly update their mods to be compatible with the latest version of the game.

Mojang releases updates for various reasons. These updates may include bug fixes, new features, and improvements to game performance. But modders often face challenges when Mojang changes their game and interferes with modder code. The modder must tweak their code until the game recognises the input. If Minecraft cannot recognize the input, it may crash the game or break, making the mod (and sometimes the game itself) useless and broken.

## Modders and Minecraft Updates

> The modding decline in Minecraft is also attributed to the fact that there are fewer new players coming into the game, which means that there are fewer people interested in creating and using mods. Additionally, the introduction of the Minecraft Marketplace has made it difficult for modders to monetize their work, which has discouraged many from continuing to create mods for the game.

Reviewer: Do we have a source for this?

Reviewer: Personally I think it's a bit off topic. 

If we could just leave this conversation open for now and the next reviewer can give their opinion as well and we'll see

## Impact on players

Modding is a significant aspect of the Minecraft community, with players using mods to enhance their gameplay experience. However, Mojang's new update release cycle has had a significant impact on players, particularly those who rely on mods.

Players have different preferences when it comes to updates. Some prefer small, frequent updates, while others prefer larger, more significant updates. Mojang's new update cycle, which involves pushing out small updates sooner, has been well-received by the majority of vanilla players. However, the new update cycle has caused confusion and frustration among players who use mods. Modders need time to update their mods to work with the latest version of Minecraft. With the new update cycle, modders are struggling to keep up with the updates, leading to mods that are incompatible with the latest version of Minecraft.

> The new update cycle has caused confusion and frustration among players who use mods. Modders need time to update their mods to work with the latest version of Minecraft. However, with the new update cycle, modders are struggling to keep up with the updates, leading to mods that are incompatible with the latest version of Minecraft.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modders need time to update their mods to work with the latest version of Minecraft. However, with the new update cycle, modders are struggling to keep up with the updates, leading to mods that are incompatible with the latest version of Minecraft.
```

this is said in the paragraph above, maybe it slipped its way through when you were refactoring :trolleybus:

> Mojang's new schedule is much more flexible in that it allows them to fix bugs and develop features in parallel. No longer will they have to work a few silent months to release a big update all at once, now they can have a more streamlined release process with smaller, more often updates where all experimental content wise changes are offloaded into the experimental datapack instead of only snapshots, which means we can use them sooner.

On the other hand, some modders have expressed concern about the impact of the new update cycle on modders. One of the main concerns is that updates will cause mods to break more often, leading to frustration for both modders and players.

> It's not really giving mods a good period to "settle" which I believe is harmful to mod pack communities and servers while beneficial to vanilla players.

Overall, the impact of Mojang's new update cycle on modders is still up for debate. While some modders have provided positive feedback, others have expressed concerns about the impact on modders.

# Conclusion

> It is clear that Mojang's update cycle has had a significant impact on modders. While some modders have been able to adapt and continue making money, others have struggled to keep up with the constant changes and updates to the game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is clear that Mojang's update cycle has had a significant impact on modders. While some modders have been able to adapt, others have struggled to keep up with the constant changes and updates to the game.
```

i'm not sure we should place a focus on money

## Benefits for Modders

Despite the challenges, there are also benefits for modders in the update cycle. Updates can provide new opportunities for modders to create mods that take advantage of new features and improvements in the game. Additionally, updates can help keep the game fresh and interesting for players, which can increase the demand for mods as a result. Overall, Mojang updates can have both positive and negative effects on modders. While updates can provide new opportunities and keep the game fresh, they can also create challenges and require modders to invest time and resources into updating their mods.

## Impact on players

Modding is a significant aspect of the Minecraft community, with players using mods to enhance their gameplay experience. However, Mojang's new update release cycle has had a significant impact on players, particularly those who rely on mods. This section examines the impact of the update cycle on players, including their preferences, confusion, and frustration.

> Players have different preferences when it comes to updates. Some prefer small, frequent updates, while others prefer larger, more significant updates. Mojang's new update cycle, which involves pushing out small updates sooner, has been well-received by the majority of vanilla players. However, this new cycle has negatively impacted modders and the players who rely on mods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Players have different preferences when it comes to updates. Some prefer small, frequent updates, while others prefer larger, more significant updates. Mojang's new update cycle, which involves pushing out small updates sooner, has been well-received by the majority of vanilla players. However, the new update cycle has caused confusion and frustration among players who use mods. Modders need time to update their mods to work with the latest version of Minecraft. With the new update cycle, modders are struggling to keep up with the updates, leading to mods that are incompatible with the latest version of Minecraft.
```

Reviewer: This didn't show up well in the github diff view. I'm just merging this paragraph and the one below it

The new update cycle has caused confusion and frustration among players who use mods. Modders need time to update their mods to work with the latest version of Minecraft. However, with the new update cycle, modders are struggling to keep up with the updates, leading to mods that are incompatible with the latest version of Minecraft.

> Players who use mods are frustrated by the lack of compatibility with the latest version of Minecraft. They are forced to choose between updating their game and losing access to their favourite mods or sticking with an older version of Minecraft and missing out on new features and improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Players who use mods are frustrated by the lack of compatibility with the latest version of Minecraft. They are forced to choose between updating their game and losing access to their favourite mods, or sticking with an older version of Minecraft and missing out on new features and improvements.
```

Furthermore, the new update cycle has caused confusion among players who are not familiar with the mods. They may not understand why their favourite mods no longer work, leading to frustration and disappointment.

# Modders' opinions

> Modders in the Minecraft modding community have shared their feedback on the impact of Mojang's new update release cycle on modders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Modders in the Minecraft modding community have shared their feedback on the update cycle with us.
```

> ## Positive feedback

Reviewer: I think we can get rid of the positive and negative headers to improve flow

Some modders have praised Mojang's new update cycle for providing players with more frequent updates and bug fixes. This, in turn, creates a better gaming experience for players. Additionally, some modders believe that the new update cycle can help modders by providing them with a more stable platform to work with.

> One modder states that "Mojang's new schedule is much more flexible in that it allows them to fix bugs and develop features in parallel. No longer will they have to work a few silent months to release a big update all at once, now they can have a more streamlined release process with smaller, more often updates where all experimental content wise changes are offloaded into the experimental datapack instead of only snapshots, which means we can use them sooner."

Reviewer: This should be Markdown Quotes for consistency with the Curseforge article

```suggestion
> Mojang's new schedule is much more flexible in that it allows them to fix bugs and develop features in parallel. No longer will they have to work a few silent months to release a big update all at once, now they can have a more streamlined release process with smaller, more often updates where all experimental content wise changes are offloaded into the experimental datapack instead of only snapshots, which means we can use them sooner.
```

## Negative feedback

> On the other hand, some modders have expressed concern about the impact of the new update cycle on modders. One of the main concerns is that updates may cause mods to break more often, leading to frustration for both modders and players.

Reviewer: I think we can be more certain of this to convey the modders sentiment.

```suggestion
On the other hand, some modders have expressed concern about the impact of the new update cycle on modders. One of the main concerns is that updates will cause mods to break more often, leading to frustration for both modders and players.
```

> Another modder states that "It's also not really giving mods a good period to "settle" which I believe is harmful to mod pack communities and servers while beneficial to vanilla players."

Reviewer: same as above

```suggestion
> It's not really giving mods a good period to "settle" which I believe is harmful to mod pack communities and servers while beneficial to vanilla players.
```

Overall, the impact of Mojang's new update cycle on modders is still up for debate. While some modders have provided positive feedback, others have expressed concerns about the impact on modders.
# Conclusion

> It is clear that Mojang's update cycle has had a significant impact on modders. While some modders have been able to adapt and continue making money, others have struggled to keep up with the constant changes and updates to the game. The lack of an official mod API has also made it difficult for modders to have their work endorsed and distributed through a central repository in-game.

Reviewer: I feel like the mention of an official API comes out of nowhere to be honest

Despite these challenges, Mojang's priority is the game itself. While they are aware of the problems that the update system creates for modders, they are putting little focus on making the workload easier for said creators. This means that modders will need to continue to adapt and find new ways to make their work compatible with the latest updates.

> Overall, Minecraft modding's future remains uncertain. While some modders have monetised their work, it is unclear whether this trend will continue. As the game continues to evolve and change, modders will need to find new ways to keep up with the latest updates and changes. Only time will tell how this will impact the Minecraft modding community in the long run.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The future of Minecraft modding remains uncertain. As the game continues to evolve and change, modders will need to find new ways to keep up with the latest updates and changes. Only time will tell how this will impact the community in the long run.
```
